and we're live hello Bernie how are you
Joe wonderful pleasure to meet you
nice to meet you it's exciting to have
you here man and it's obviously an
exciting time for you you know
presidential campaign is up in full
swing do you do you get frustrated by
the the time constraints of the debates
absolutely it's you shouldn't even call
them a debate what they are is a you
know reality TV show in which you have
to come up with a soundbite know that
stuff it is the meaning it's the meaning
to the candidates and it's the meaning
to the American people you can't explain
the complexity of health care in America
in 45 seconds nobody can but why is it
still done that way if you try to do
let's pull this thing you know I think
the DNC is in a difficult position
they have 20-plus candidates and they
want to give everybody a fair shot which
is the right thing to do and then if
you're gonna have 10 candidates up on
the stage what do you do but there are
other ways that we've got to do it
because the issues facing this country
or someone normos and in some cases so
complicated nobody in the world can
honestly explain them in 45 seconds and
that what encourages people to do is to
come up with sound bites and do absurd
things so if I yelled and screamin the
show I took my clothes off we get a lot
of publicity right yeah they give a
thoughtful answer to a complicated
question it's not so sexy for the media
you don't even have a chance to give a
thoughtful answer like Tulsi Gabbard
went after Kamala Harris and then Kamala
Harris had about 12 seconds to reply to
it it was so ridiculous to do to have
something that's such an important issue
did you or did you not put all those
people in jail for marijuana did you
laugh about it did this happen did that
happen all these different things with
was evidence withheld that's how these
are a long conversations but it takes us
to another issue and that is a nation we
do a pretty bad job in analyzing and
discussing the serious issues facing our
country and I hold the media to some
degree responsible for that you know
other countries what they do is that you
Joe you want to run for president
whether your party in the general
election we're gonna give you a certain
amount of time hours on television and
you use those hours anyway you want one
a 15 minute discus remember Ross Perot
yes and people used to laugh at Ross
Perot because he used to get up there
with a chart and all this stuff and and
the media made fun of him but in fact he
tried in his own way to explain his
point of view to the American people and
we need serious discussion on on serious
issues well he had the RP because he was
so rich he had the ability to buy
airtime on network television which is
pretty unprecedented he just bought a
chunk of airtime and then fled his case
but you know what goes on in other
countries you don't have to buy that
time what the obligation is if you are a
network you're gonna make that time free
and available to candidates do you think
that that's something that could be
viable in America could could you
convince CBS and NBC and ABC to go along
with something like that no you couldn't
convince them you'd have to pass
legislation to make that happen but
everyone's online today I mean the
entire country is essentially getting
email and Facebook and all that jazz
like why bother doing it in this
particular medium that has an inherent
time constraint well you're right I mean
the Internet has revolutionized politics
and in many ways good ways we use our
social media how email list which is
very large we every day we're sending
out stuff and other candidates are doing
it the same way but television still has
a very important role to be playing I'm
sure it does but I mean the ability to
discuss things in in long-form what you
can do online like you can do right here
right now but you can't get that on
television what you could I mean if you
had this data interrupt you every 15
minutes no no no no no what I'm saying
about is is in what goes on in other
countries if I'm not mistaken I don't
hold me this I think in the UK you
remember the Labour Party you're a
candidate
mm-hm here's 30 minutes of time and you
do with it as you want you want to speak
30 minutes on health care whatever it
may be you can do that really yeah and
they don't interrupt with commercial no
no no no that's the law that they have
given this is the candidates opportunity
to speak at length to the people of the
country what what are the misconceptions
of you because here's
here's the if you go to the knee-jerk
conservative reaction you talk to people
who are not interested in anyone that
wants to be a Democratic Socialist they
hear the name Bernie Sanders the
negative implications are that you are
somehow or another going to take their
money right did you that annoying to you
yes it is of course it is and also that
I missed the Maduro I'm a dictator I
love dictatorships and all that stuff
and the truth is Joe that if you look at
the issues that I campaign on and what I
believe on they are really not terribly
radical they exist in many countries all
over the world for example just we can
start on health care field like is the
idea that health care is a human right
not a privilege a radical idea I don't
think it is it's not and the truth is we
are the only major country on earth many
people don't know this we're the only
major country on earth not to guarantee
health care to all people as a human
right and yet we end up spending almost
twice as much per capita on health care
the function and you can argue with me
if you want but the function of the
current health care system is not to
provide quality care to all it is to
make tens of billions of dollars in
profit for the drug companies and the
insurance companies that's the function
if you go to Canada and I live 50 miles
away from the Canadian border you have
major heart surgery you're in the
hospital for a month do you know what
the bill is when you get out zero you
got it
you got any doctor you want you don't
have to take out your wallet and yet
they guarantee your health care to all
of their people and they spend one-half
of what we spend that's kind of what I
want to do and I don't think that that's
terribly radical we have a program now
which everybody knows it's called
Medicare was started by Lyndon Johnson
back in 1965 it is a popular program all
that I want to do over a four year
period is to expand the today
eligibility age is 65 want to take about
55 45 35 everybody over four-year period
that's about it and I want to expand
benefits to include a dental care
hearing aids and eyeglasses as well
that's about it not too radical well
that doesn't sound radical at all no
when you say that they that Canada
spends less obviously they have less
people you mean less per capita just
half per capita exactly
and the quality of care is as good or
better do they have problems yeah
they're problems everybody has problems
but overall the health care experts will
tell you the quality of care there is as
good or better than it is in our country
so what's the hurdle okay I'll tell you
exactly what earnest the hurdle is
exactly the same thing isn't every other
aspect of our lives it's the power of
money all right listen to this over the
last 20 years the drug companies alone
have spent four and a half billion
dollars in 20 years
on lobbying and campaign contributions
that's what we're up against the
knowledge and I mark my words within a
short period of time you will see TV ads
in California all over this country
demonizing Bernie Sanders he wants to do
this terrible thing to you he wants to
do that they have unbelievable amounts
of money and politicians are frightened
of that power give you one example back
in 2016 I got involved here in a little
way with an effort on the part of the
nurses to control the cost of
prescription drugs in California you may
recall that effort I do it was a ballot
item in one state here in California do
you know how much the drug companies
alone spent to defeat that a bit they
spent 131 million dollars on one ballot
item in one state all right
last year the top ten drug companies
made 69 billion dollars a week ago I
went to Canada with a number of
Americans who are dealing with diabetes
we bought insulin in Windsor Ontario for
1/10 the price 10% of the price same
exact product being charged in America
so you got drug companies that are
engaged in collusion and in price-fixing
who are incredibly greedy and the result
is many elderly people many working
people simply cannot afford the medicine
they need this is it's unbelievable and
the reason for all of that stuff is we
are the only country in the world that
does not negotiate with the drug
companies they can charge you any price
they want and that has to do with the
fact that we don't have a national
health care program Medicare is not
negotiating etcetera is this something
that can really be implemented inside of
four years
it really is an enormous endeavor well I
want you to think back think back Joe in
you had Lyndon Johnson is president and
by the way this idea of national health
care this has been talked about
literally since Teddy Roosevelt is not a
new concept
health care is human right that's where
Teddy Roosevelt's what FDR was talking
about Harry Truman was talking about it
kennedy was talking about it kennedy got
killed Lyndon Johnson picked up the
mantle and and their idea was according
to people in their administration we'll
start with the elderly who are most
impacted by by health care costs and
sickness was thought and they did in
1965 without the technology we have
today they implemented Medicare 19
million people elderly people signed up
in the first year so if you could slot a
brand-new program and have 19 million
people sign up with a technology that is
way way behind where we are today why
can't we over a four-year period simply
expand that program I don't think it's
such a difficult operation so when you
talk about the drug companies in the
lobbyists and the enormous amount of
money that they spend is this does this
exist anywhere else other than the
United States lobbyists on that level no
no and the reason you know in Canada
what you have is you have a national
health care program and so forth and
they sit down and they they negotiate
with the drug companies they have their
own approach but every other major
country on earth says to the drug
companies of course you can't charge us
any price you want this is a reasonable
price tell me what your profits are what
your expenditures are this is a price
for us you could walk in you know if you
have an illness you could walk into the
pharmacy tomorrow and the price has been
doubled and you say to the pharmacist
what happened is that they just raise
the prices they could do it any day they
want any price they want now lobbyists
are in general when people talk about
lobbyists and it's it's an unattractive
term we think of it in terms of a
negative we don't we don't think of well
thank god there's lobbyists we think
while there's someone with enormous
amounts of money using that money to
gain influence on politicians and it
shapes regular people that shapes our
lives mostly in a negative way this is
the way most people look at them not
saying it's correct why why do we have
that system in place like why do we have
lobbyists why is it legal for someone to
spend exorbitant amount of money
exorbitant amounts of money to affect
our civilization to affect the way our
culture works now you're taking us into
a whole new area yeah all right let's
look all right let me eat or not today
in America you got three people only
more wealth than the bottom half of the
American Society you don't see that on
television too much of you know you
don't three people you got the top 1%
owning more wealth in the bottom ninety
two percent listen to this this is a
statistic we recently saw came from the
Federal Reserve over the last 30 years
the top 1% has seen a 21 trillion dollar
increase in their wealth the bottom half
of America are seen a nine hundred
billion dollar decline in net wealth so
what you have in America today is a
relatively small number of incredibly
wealthy people and I deal with these
guys every day peoples are always
talking about rich you don't know what
rich is what multi-billion dollar
operations are incredible power over our
society and if you are the
pharmaceutical industry and last year 10
companies made 69 billion dollars in
profit you're sitting around right now
saying all right that's great how do we
do better next year what strategy do we
have we have put a lot of ads on we're
gonna work with other during the CNN
debate that I participated in recently
in the debate right in the middle of the
debate the drug companies and the
insurance companies had an ad telling
how bad so-called how bad Medicare for
all would be so they they're smart guys
and they use their power over
politicians so they use their power over
the media they spend billions of dollars
on advertising on media to make sure
that they make as much as I can in
profit but it's not any different with
Wall Street it's not any different with
the fossil fuel industry or the prison
industrial complex
these guys have wealth they have power
and they could care less about the needs
of working people in this country and
that's the dynamic of American politics
right now and in our campaign look we're
taking them all on and I know it makes a
lot of people
uncomfortable but we are taking on all
of these entities and all of their
wealth and all of their power and that's
what a political revolution is about so
the real problem seems to be that they
have this strategy of unlimited growth
not that they're not providing
medication that people need to save
their lives I mean it's obviously
important to have a pharmaceutical come
of course of course right so there's
good that they provide but the business
aspect of it is where the problem lies
right right look they have great
researches but if you check how they
even spend their money
you know they will tell you this all of
them money out research develop we've
charted we're tackling cancer we're
tackling diabetes Alzheimer's the truth
is of course they are but the bulk of
their money is going off into what we
call me to drugs they make modest
changes in a drug which really doesn't
improve people's well-being in order to
make profits so the answer is yes we
need obviously vigorous research and
development and by the way your tax
dollars all of our tax filers often goes
to that research and we don't get the
benefit of in terms of lower prices so
it's just it's a business model issue
it's a greed issue you've got it and how
would one stop that when you're dealing
with this the kind of influence that
you're talking about with 69 billion
dollars in a year I mean the resources
they have
how would you stop that well that is
kind of what we call the 64 another
question yeah all right and I'll tell
you what I think this is what I believe
if you think back on American history
and you think about the real changes
that have taken place in society you
think about the labor movement and
working-class people standing up and
saying to their employers we're not
going to be treated like animals anymore
you can't hire and fire us you can't
work us you know fifteen hours a day we
we we deserve dignity and you think
about the growth of the labor movement
of millions of people beginning to slam
together and fight you think about the
civil rights movement you know and it
wasn't just dr. Martin Luther King jr.
it was again millions of African
Americans and their white allies say
we're going to end segregation and
racism in this country think about the
women's movement
a hundred years ago women in America
didn't even have the right to vote
think about the gay rights movement
think about the environmental the only
way the change takes place is when
ordinary people come together and stand
up if I can say that the status quo is
not working and that's what I believe
and that's what we're trying to do so
with the the message of our campaign is
it's us not me because I can't do it
alone let me be very honest with you if
I were elected president tomorrow I
can't do the things that I would like to
do that I'm campaigning on unless
millions of people were working with me
to tell the corporate elite that they
cannot get it all so how would that be
implemented let's say you become
president you gotta become president
well you think we're gonna take a shot
all right president Bernie what do you
do you get in there what do you do okay
first of all you make a very clear you
make it clear to the American people
what your agenda is and I appreciate the
opportunity to talk about an agenda and
in more than twelve seconds what does
that mean all right we're gonna fight
for Medicare for all we're gonna raise
the minimum wage to a living wage
we are gonna deal with education in a
profound well yes a profound way because
I worry about what's going on in
education today everybody knows that the
ages of zero through four are the most
important years for human intellectual
and emotional development right every
psychologist will tell you that and yet
we have a totally dysfunctional early
childhood system we pay we pay our
childcare workers starvation wages yet
working-class families cannot find
affordable quality Charlie you got our
public school systems all around this
country in many of them really being
challenged right now teachers are
underpaid teachers are working two or
three jobs you got kids who can't afford
to go to college and here's something
that is just unbelievable kids who have
gone to college leaving school with
50,000 hundred thousand dollars in debt
unbelievable these are issues that we
have to deal with it I will deal with
them and we are going to substantially
improve in the quality of education
America we're going to cancel student
debt by imposing
on Wall Street speculation all right so
you got a deal with education you got a
deal with climate change you know the
truth is that Donald Trump is dead wrong
climate change is not a hoax it is a
very very dangerous reality for our
country and the rest of the world
scientists tell us we have less than 12
years to transform our energy system
away from fossil fuel or there will be
irreparable damage all right so those
are and healthcare of course for all so
those are some of the major is criminal
justice immigration reform you lay it on
the table you see these are the issues
that we are going to focus on and you
rally the American people around those
issues and you tell people like Mitch
McConnell who represents a very poor
state in Kentucky that Mitch if you are
going to oppose raising that minimum
wage to at least $15 an hour I will be
in Kentucky as president of the United
States and we're gonna have a rally
because you're gonna have to stop
representing and I hope by the way the
Mitch McConnell is not the leader I hope
that Democrats can gain control over the
Senate but if he is we'll put enormous
pressure on him to do what the people
want every idea Joe here's the bottom
line honestly every idea that I've just
talked to you about it you're supported
by a majority of the American people
these are not radical ideas let's let's
take these one step at a time cuz you
mentioned a lot of important things
there let's go with the minimum wage
thing now the argument that I've heard
about the minimum wage being raised to
$15 an hour is that their entry-level
positions for high school kids for
people that are just getting their feet
wet in the marketplace they're learning
how to work they learn they're making
some money after school that they that
if you charge or if businesses have to
pay $15 an hour to people like that to
entry-level people that they won't be
able to stay open well first of all they
will be competing against you know if
your business lumber business and both
of us have to raise our wages at the
same level we both have the same burden
so it's spread across that is what my
conservative colleagues will tell you
the truth is I don't have the numbers
right in front of me that while it
certainly is true that young people do
work at McDonald's and the minimum wage
jobs a significant and majority of the
workers
are not kids they are often and I met
them at McDonald's they are workers who
have children themselves when we we work
very hard to raise the minimum wage at
Amazon and at Disney we put pressure on
both of those companies and they did the
right thing and when you talk to the
people at Amazon who got that raise
these are not kids these are people in
their 30s these are these are ordinary
adults who cannot make it on 12 13 bucks
an hour so I think the argument that all
their old kids is not really quite
accurate well not even that although
they're all kids but that if they are
kids what would you think about making a
minimum wage for someone who's under 18
that's different from a minimum wage of
someone who's a legal adult I'm not I'm
not for that I think we do it and and
look at many of these young people you
know have their own needs I just talked
to a young woman last night who is
working going to college working
full-time trying to take care of her
family as well so I think look the
minimum wage has not been raised in ten
years it is now $7.25 an hour which is
clearly unacceptable the cost of housing
California all over this country is
rising fairly rapidly people can't
afford health care can't afford College
I don't think it's asking our employers
too much to pay at least $15 an hour
minimum wage now I'm glad you brought up
Amazon because one of the things that
always freaks me out is when I find out
that enormous corporations that make
billions of dollars have tax loopholes
where they literally pay no money how is
that possible and how do you stop that
well it's the same thing that the drug
companies how is it possible that we pay
10 times more for insulin in this
country and for other drugs than the one
in Canada or countries around the world
mmm and the answer is its power so what
is what is the goal of major
corporations in America it's to be
deregulated as much as possible so in
some cases they can pollute our water
our air our environment it's also not
the panty taxes
Kim Trump campaign as we recall he said
my tax plan is not going to benefit
wealthy it's gonna benefit working
people well it turns out over ten years
eighty-three percent of the benefit at
the end of ten years goes to the top one
percent that's what these guys though I
remember I'm the called the ranking
member on the Budget Committee in the
Senate and some guy came forward
representing one of the big business
organizations and this is their agenda
their agenda was to cut Social Security
Medicare and Medicaid and to do away
with all corporate taxes so what you
have right now that's that's what greed
is about they want at all
so as you indicated you have a company
like Amazon owned by Jeff Bezos
who happens to be the wealthiest guy in
America worth about a hundred and fifty
billion Amazon paid zero in federal
income taxes and it's not just them
dozens of corporations paid nothing or
very very little and on top of all of
that you got these guys able to stashed
all over the world come trillions of
dollars trillions of dollars in the
Cayman Islands in Bermuda in Luxembourg
and of the tax havens that is insane and
that has gotta end yeah
how is it legal to do that why is it
legal Joe it is legal because they make
the laws right all right you know it
that is what here you're touching now on
the heart and soul of the tragedy of
American politics how does it happen
that on issue after issue the American
people the working class of this country
wants something nobody pays any
attention to it but billionaires want
something and it gets done and that has
to do with a corrupt political system so
right now if you are the Koch brothers
or some multi billionaire you say to the
leadership of the Republican Party in
some cases to the democratic money hey
guess what we're prepared to put
hundreds of millions of dollars into
your campaign hundreds of millions of
dollars coming from one or two people
and here is my agenda
I want tax breaks I want a trade system
which will enable me to shut down in
this country and go to China or Mexico
and pay people there two bucks an hour I
want to be able to do more pollution
because I don't like all of this you
know money I have to spend preventing
pollution of the air or the water that's
what I want you to do and by the way I'm
worried about the deficit so you may as
well cut Social Security Medicare and
Medicaid how many Americans actually
believe that we should give tax breaks
to billionaires and cut Social Security
Medicare and Medicaid very few that is
talk to Mitch McConnell get Mitch on the
show that is exactly what he believes
but that's ridiculous right and it seems
that if you just took away those tax
breaks the enormous amount of money that
would come from those corporations
having to pay their fair share would
take care of a lot of the expenses of
all these things that you're proposing
exactly how like ok let's talk about the
education because the idea of free
education is a wonderful thing for
people I mean the idea that you get out
of college and you're in debt in in an
insane amount that you might have 10 20
years where you have to pay it back and
I know many people that are in jail
there are people who are getting their
social security checks garnished right
now it's not 10 to 20 years in some
cases it's literally a lifetime now a
lot of that is I mean it's got it in
some way be preventable by what we're
talking about here absolutely all right
and is that how you would pay for it I
mean how well you exactly how would pay
okay
I don't think and we pay for every idea
that we have we pay for and we pay for
it by understanding that today we have
massive levels of income and wealth
inequality and we have many cases the
wealthy and large corporations paying
nothing or very little in taxes here is
the issue in terms of education 4050
years ago you're an average American
working class person you graduated high
school especially if there was a union
around you can go out and get a job and
make it into the middle class you could
own your own home you could send your
kids to school it looked a pretty good
life you made it in the middle class 40
or 50 years later there's an explosion
of Technology there's a growth in
unfettered free trade and it is clear
now
that most people to make it into the
middle class are going to need a higher
education that's college or maybe it's
technical training
in order to become a skilled worker it
is insane to me to deny working class
people and lower-income people the
opportunity to get that education
because the cost of college has soared
so all that I say is that a hundred plus
years ago the American people said that
we should have free public education I
went to a public school my parents
didn't pay a nickel went to kindergarten
I went through the 12th grade pretty
good education in Brooklyn New York all
that I'm saying is the world has changed
and a high school degree is not good
enough anymore
so expand that concept through college
now guess what 50 years ago do you know
how much the University of California
very great University cost in terms of
tuition how much virtually free what's
it now I don't know but it's pretty high
it is how its thousands and thousands of
dollars so you had great universities
like the University of California City
University of New York State colleges
all over this country where tuition was
virtually free and then what happened
for a variety of political reasons
States and the federal government
started cutting back on higher education
and put more and more burden on the
student with higher and higher tuition
which is where we are today
so all that I'm saying is in the year
2019 2020 you have our working-class
kids are gonna go out and get the jobs
that are out there they need a they need
a higher education which would be
tuition free in terms of the
cancellation of debt which is my view
you got 45 million people um who are
dealing with that I'll never forget this
this is where I really hit me I was in
Burlington Vermont and I had a meeting
on an issue and a young woman comes up
and she says she's a doctor she
graduated medical so she's very happy
she's practicing in a community health
center loves what she's doing said
Bernie I gotta tell you though I am
$300,000 in debt I've been gone to
medical school I couldn't believe it
I was in Iowa a young woman $400,000 in
debt this is not unusual for medical
schools and in dental schools and you
know ordinary people fifty thousand
hundred thousand dollars for going to
college or getting a master's degree
we promised these young people he said
go to college come on and get an
education you'll get decent paying jobs
well the answer is they have not been
able to do that so what we have proposed
in one piece of legislation or tool
actually is to make public colleges and
universities tuition-free cancel all
student debt in this country that will
cost two point two trillion dollars a
lot of money over a 10-year period we do
this through a tax on Wall Street
speculation which will bring in two
point four trillion dollars we bailed
out Wall Street 11 years ago and by the
way these are crooks on Wall Street who
engaged in legal behavior taxpayers
against my vote bailed them out if we
can bail out Wall Street you know what
we can cancel student debt and provide
public colleges and universities
tuition-free when you say a tax on Wall
Street speculation what exactly it will
be a tax on all of the try every sale of
attacks you people buy and sell stocks
and bonds all of them we have a very
modest tax on it and by the way it will
have an impact on speculation by cutting
back on the high-frequency trading which
we now see so you would just there is
there's no current tax on direct so you
would put a small amount and that would
do the job that would that would raise
more than enough money it's a very small
tax it exists a small how much it
depends on the nature of the transaction
but it's less than one-half of one
percent really yeah and now because the
yeah because the amount of stocks being
sold bought and saw and this is not
again a new idea it's it's being done in
countries all over the world
what about here's one of the darkest
things about student loans is that if
you go bankrupt it doesn't matter
you still owe that and that that's kind
of crazy I mean if you have a serious
medical issue if you're you're held up
well whatever whatever happens to you
that's awful you go bankrupt most of
those things are resolved but not
student loans right I mean again this
looks through the and that has to do
with bankruptcy law which was passed
against my vote and while you were on
bankruptcy and I should have mentioned
this before when you talk about the
health care system a half a million
Americans every single year go bankrupt
because of medical bills they can't pay
but right with student
talk to this guy in Nevada if you forget
it guys is Bernie you know I'm all when
Mike's guys in his fifties and he said
you know I've been paying off my student
debt for years I'm going nowhere because
the interest rates are high and I fear
very much which is the case that they
will start garnishing taking away my
social security checks taking money away
from me
so people are carrying this burden the
result is that they can't
in many cases get married and have kids
they certainly can't buy a home they
can't buy a car they are really crushed
by this debt and what was their crime
what did they do they've tried to get a
higher education I think that's pretty
crazy and a lot of them when they do
this higher education they're 18 years
old imagine making a decision when your
brain isn't even fully formed it's gonna
affect you for the rest of your life
you've got it exactly right and you talk
to these kids so how much debt do you
owe
what kind of interest rate shipping yeah
I really don't know they just told me to
sign up am sorry now right now we are a
week I'm not even a week out just a few
days away from to mass shootings in a
row and whenever these things happen
there's all these people that want
action but nobody knows exactly what to
do there's calls for gun control
there's calls for mental health reform
there's calls for I mean what if
anything can be done to stop these
things from happening and how have you
sat down and tried to come up with some
sort of a solution and is there a
solution look I would be lying to you if
I told you I had a magical answer I
don't and this is such a horrific
situation I you know we were in you know
we had a town meeting we were in Nevada
actually in Las Vegas when El Paso
happened
and we'd there tell me and I said let's
take a moment of silence to remember the
victims and pray for the survivors
literally the next day another part of
Las Vegas I have to do it again and I
said I can't believe that just yesterday
we did this and I have to do it again
this is I don't know what the words you
know my friend beta or Rock was
you don't know what words what can you
say it happens again and again who can
imagine some lunatic walking into a
school or a mall or just on a nightclub
area and taken out an assault weapon and
shooting down people and that we almost
become to accept this as a normal part
of American life is is incredible is
just totally demoralizing alright so
here's what I think there's no magical
answer and but let me tell you what I
think first of all this is the reality
the reality is that today as we speak
there are approximately 400 million guns
in America today we have more guns than
we have people we have between 5 to 10
million assault weapons and an assault
weapon as you know is a military style
weapon designed to kill human beings
kind of rapidly so that's and then on
top of that we have again nothing to be
proud of but you know we have a number
of mentally unstable people people for
whatever reason are walking the streets
they're suicidal the homicidal that's
the mix that we have I think the answer
is and I'm not the guy to invent all
these ideas but here are some of what we
have to do first of all if you want on a
gun in America you have got to do we
have got to know that you are a stable
person and that means that we need to
expand a the background checks that
currently exist ok so we've got a note
did you beat up your wife have you
committed crimes etc etc what is the
state of your mental health
number two we got to make that Universal
number two right now that there is a
background check if you walk into a gun
show it does look into a gun shop but
you can buy guns in various states at a
gun show and you don't have to do any of
that I saw you and I go to a gun show
you sell me a gun I don't have to and
you know I don't have to do that third
of all I can today legally walk into a
gun show pass the background check and
buy a dozen guns walk out and sell them
criminal elements who will use them for
bad things so I think those are issues
that most Americans believe we have got
to deal with him we can fortunately I
happen to believe and I believe this for
30 years that we should not be selling
with distributing assault weapons in
this country they are weapons of mass
destruction in a sense they kill people
rapidly as we saw and and thank God by
the way when we talk about both Dayton
and El Paso thank God cops were there
very very quickly and did an incredible
job so that guy had walked into the
nightclub there could have been dozens
and dozens more people killed in it
within a few minutes time I happen to
believe a that we should not be selling
or distributing an assault weapons in
this country that's my view period so I
believe in a ban on assault weapons and
I think we have got to begin thinking
about when we have five to ten million
assault weapons which is more than the
US military has we have to think about a
strong licensing procedure in terms of
who owns these assault weapons so that's
some of what I think there are many
other things but those are some of the
ideas that are out there now the legal
gun owners who are law-abiding citizens
who would never in a million years think
about going around shooting people but
they love guns they hear this kind of
stuff about like banning assault rifles
banning assault weapons they don't even
like the term assault weapons right they
like that refer to them as their
individual names for whatever they are
these people feel like this is an
inexorable part of being an American
that you should be able to own a gun
it's written into our Bill of Rights
it's written into our the way we the way
this country was founded it's the Second
Amendment what do you say to those
people that don't that don't want to
give up their guns but they wouldn't do
it and they want to protect themselves
they feel like these guns are viable
options to protect themselves from
criminals I understand that and Joe you
may know I'm a senator from the state of
Vermont and the state of Vermont is one
of the most rural states in America
every form that holds thousands and
thousands of people are out in the woods
hunting and it's something that's part
of our tradition I believe in it I
believe in the Second Amendment but all
that I ask of the gun owners and you're
absolutely right 99.9% of gun owners
would never in a million billion years
think of doing these horrible things but
in the moment that we are living in I
think that we're all gonna have to make
you know some concessions to the reality
of what is going on and that is that
there is a small number of qalam what
you want to brave people who are
prepared to do that you know in
Australia you'll remember that terrible
New Zealand I'm sorry the terrible
shooting at the mosque and they moved
pretty quickly in an aggressive way so
you know I wish I can say in the best of
all possible worlds yeah you know you
can own any weapon you want and so forth
and son we're not living in the best of
all possible worlds we're living in a
world where we're shocked every day by
Iran I I agree we are living in a
terrible situation I mean there's
hundreds of mass shootings a year now
which is insane and if you look at the
number in comparison to the rest of the
world it's crazy like a big one and in
other countries like three mass
shootings in a year we had more than 270
it's it's crazy but how would you
implement something like this well the
idea of banning assault weapons has been
done in 1994 we'd manned assault weapons
I believe I believe it was for 10 years
that ban was undone by a Republican
majority and it didn't you know I'm not
suggesting by the way than anything here
that if you banned assault weapons
tomorrow that would radically change
everything but it we have got to do the
best that we can do and again I preface
my remarks by telling I don't have a
magical solution you got hundreds of
millions of guns out there you have
people who should not be owning these
guns who get set off by God knows what
and and do terrible things all we can do
is the best that we could do but to say
we can't do anything I think is a real
disservice to the American I'll tell you
something else that bothers me you know
in addition to Lohara
of
seeing people lying on the street dead
is what this is doing to the children of
this country and I think we
underestimate that I have seven
grandchildren and and for them and for
kids all over this country you're gonna
see the Falls coming kids coming back to
school you're gonna see in schools all
over America drills alright this is what
you do if somebody walks into the school
all right you're gonna hide under here
you go over there kids a couple of
months ago I was in Iowa this guy is
about six foot two big guy probably a
football player and he says senator
Sanders I gotta tell you that the young
people in my school are increasingly
frightened terrified about what can
happen in the school think about what
this the trauma the trauma of
what this gun violence is doing so I
think we're all is Americans they ain't
no easy answers here but they were all
gonna have to come together and figure
this one out
and do the best that we can now would
that mean forcibly removing these guns
from people's homes I don't think you're
gonna have the FBI knocking on
somebody's doors and taking it that's
not what we do in America you have 400
million guns already out there yeah
building more every year right now as we
speak
gun manufacturers or make manufacturers
are making more guns this is happening
right now so if those guns already exist
it's more than enough oh yeah how would
you stop well again I think look you
know I do think there should be a ban on
assault weapons so that means that
manufacturers would not be able to
produce or sell those weapons to
American citizens not to the military
obviously obviously well okay so you
know and your point is well-taken if you
have four hundred million guns out there
you know so III think there are
approaches no one has any magical
solution but I've given you I'll take it
something else that I didn't mention and
that is the role of gun manufacturers is
that if you are a gun manufacturer and
you are selling a hell of a lot of guns
to a gun store in an area which normally
you would not think I mean these guys
know you know what cities buy what
pounds by how many guns and if suddenly
there is a tremendous
demand you gotta be thinking and because
why explain as this con store buying so
many guns doesn't reflect the population
in the area
you got to be able that issue with the
gun owners cope have to take some
responsibility
besides the guns a gun manufacturers I'm
sorry but besides the guns the gun
manufacturers the other gigantic issue
is mental health yeah the only way any
of this ever happens is someone has to
be insanely mentally depraved that's the
only way and many of them are medicated
and many of them are on pharmaceutical
drugs and they have been since they were
children including and FATA means like
adderall and prozac and all this
different stuff that has varied effects
on the human brain what could be done
what would you done to analyze this to
find out what the cause and effect are
and to try to figure out what what role
and how much these drugs are responsible
well two things let me respond respond
first by saying it goes without saying
that we have a mental health crisis in
America before we even talked about
drugs and for whatever reason um you
know there are a whole lot of people in
the nature of our health care system
getting back to health care is I just
talked to a woman literally last night
and we had a a town meeting and she said
this is unbelievable
she said Bernie I was in Las Vegas when
the terrible shooting took place okay
and now I am and I can understand this
perfectly I'm seeing Dayton that I'm
seeing watching television El Paso and
I'm getting a PS PTSD reaction alright
let's totally under if you were in a
place where people were shot down and
she I'm trying to get counseling I can't
find it I remember a guy called up a
woman called up my office in Burlington
Vermont and she said I'm worried about
my husband what he my brother was his
brother what he might do to himself was
somebody else we're looking for mental
health counseling we can't find
something that we can afford
so we need above and beyond gun violence
we need an instance when Medicare for
all mental health is healthcare you
break your arm that's a health issue
that's a medical issue mental health is
a medical issue and we have got to make
mental health counseling available to
all people in this country when they
need it not six months from now at a
price they can afford and under Medicare
for all it would be free so that's
number one number two your point about
studying the impact of drugs on people's
behavior and possibly resulting in
violence absolutely deserves to be
studied we should be studying the impact
of drugs in my view this is a layman's
view you know not a psychiatrist I worry
very much that we are over medicating
kids in schools you know we have this
deficit the deficient issue you know
kids are running around and they're
active you know when I was a kid people
used to run around they were active you
know it wasn't they weren't drugged up
so I worry about that whole business but
your point is well-taken I think we need
to study this issue and make sure that
these drugs in fact are not causing
kinds of reactions that we will regret
later now on the subject of drugs
marijuana is obviously a big issue in
this country and we've seen many states
make it recreational including this one
what do you think could be done and what
should be done to have this across the
especially federally you know I'm
there's a guy that I have on the podcast
coming up soon his name's John Norris
and he wrote a book on the cartels
growing marijuana illegally all over
this country and selling it especially
particularly in California now because
it's a misdemeanor because it's legal
recreationally and selling it with all
sorts of horrible pesticides on it all
sorts of like very in fact deadly
chemicals all of this because it's not
federally legal because we can't have
sanctioned licensed companies doing an
ethical job of growing something that
any responsible law-abiding person
should be able to consume okay um let me
say this when I ran for president for
the number
product nomination in 2016 I talked
about a broken criminal justice system
which ends up having in the United
States more people in jail than any
other country we have more people in
jail than China does which is a
communist authoritarian country and what
I called for then and I call for now is
the legalization of marijuana in America
right now you have a federal law it's
called the controlled substance act he
has heroin here is marijuana they are at
the same level that is insane heroin is
a killer drug you can argue the plusses
and minuses of marijuana but marijuana
ain't
heroin so we have to end and that's what
I will do as president of the United
States I believe we can do that through
executive order and I will do that
second of all what we have now is number
of states that I'm very proud I talked
about during 2016 what seemed kind of
radical the need to legalize the
decriminalize marijuana a very radical
idea four years ago it is spreading all
over the country and by the way it blows
my mind to drive through Nevada I think
you're even Kalwa now you see signs
corporations buy our marijuana yeah if
four years ago people getting arrested
you're doing that right their lives
being destroyed particularly Nevada
there was life sentences given out in
the 70s can you believe that and now you
have corporations selling the damn
product that people went to jail for so
I think ultimately you know we've got to
legalize marijuana and what's good news
in a sense is some communities some
cities are expunging the records so if
you were arrested have a criminal record
for selling marijuana
that is being expunged and that is the
right thing to do you know we can argue
about the pluses and minuses I'm not a
great fan of of drugs other people you
know I smoke marijuana a couple of times
didn't do much for me other people I
guess have different interests a couple
times
that's really true it didn't do much for
you yeah maybe getting it was in Vermont
no that's the problem maybe do something
for you well big beak off a whole lot
all right but I got other people have
had different experiences correct sure
yeah I certainly have
the other problem is of course with
illegal drugs comes you get this
horrible cycle particularly in inner
cities where you have people that are
incarcerated for illegal drugs illegal
drugs seem to be the only way out the
hard drugs when we're talking about
cocaine and all these other drugs how
how does one stop that and would you
ever consider legalizing all drugs or
decriminalizing now all drugs not at
this point no I wouldn't but you're
touching on a real tragedy yes and when
we talk about criminal justice in
America we have over two million people
in jail they are disproportionately
African American Latino and Native
American and here's what I think I think
in the wealthiest country in the history
of the world
what we have got to do instead of
building more jails unlock a lot more
people we really do have to invest in
our young people especially young people
in distressed communities what does it
mean if we can and we can do this with a
proper amount of resources make sure the
kids are not dropping out of school if
you drop out of school today you know
say you drop out in your second or third
year of high school you don't have an
education you don't have any job skills
what are you gonna do with your life and
the answer is you may well do drugs you
know or you'll get in trouble
self-destructive activity or destructive
active eating and end up in jail it
makes so much more sense from a humane
perspective protecting our people as
well as a financial situation we spend
an eighty billion dollars yet to invest
in these kids what does it mean it means
making sure they get the education that
they need paying attention having good
schools making sure that they get the
jobs that are out there doing job
training there was a principal in a
school in southern Vermont I'll never
forget what she said was a working class
school and she said Bernie I love these
kids I am NOT gonna let them drop out
and she had a mentoring program just
watching the kids who are mostly at risk
so that they would not end up going
through the cracks and getting into
trouble that's what we should be doing
as a nation and when we do that we
invest in the kids we get them jobs we
got em education the likelihood is that
like
of them falling into bad ways is
significantly reduced all those things
sound great the uncomfortable reality
about drugs though is that when drugs
are illegal criminal seldom and there's
obviously a need for drugs in terms of
not necessarily need but a demand for
drugs is it demand for drugs in this
country that's absolutely fueling
Mexican cartels and illegal drug runners
inside this country I mean there's
there's a lot of that how do you how do
you curb that if drugs are illegal but
you're raising a deep question yes all
right so the question essentially that
you're asking is what is the cause of
the opioid epidemic yes that is one one
but but the opioid epidemic is
interesting because there's so much of
it that's coming legally right that's
not so not all cartels that's the
pharmaceutical industry right but you
the heroin is illegal yes
all right now you're asking this is a
very very deep question which we don't
talk about terribly much why is it that
so many of our people are turning to
drugs to alcohol by the way and I don't
mean a drink a night but I mean serious
alcohol problems and tragically to
suicide we now have for the last three
years something that is a historical
never happened before in modern history
and that is our life expectancy is
actually going down and this is hitting
all over the country but especially
hitting rural areas and what the doctors
are saying is that these are diseases of
despair despair so you're in West
Virginia you're in rural Ohio or
anyplace Vermont anyplace and the job
you used to have earning a decent living
is now in China your kid can't afford to
go to college maybe you can't afford
health care you got nothing to look
forward to under that scenario drugs
become alcohol becomes a way out and the
worst case it's suicide so I think what
we're talking about is why is this
happening it's often in rural areas
Herman as well and how can we how can we
re-establish hope and optimism in the
American people and that gets back to a
whole lot of other issues
it means if people have health care is a
right that will certainly play a role in
this thing that walk into the doctor
when they need but it also means that
people need decent jobs that pay them a
living wage that means we have to
rebuild rural America we have to rebuild
it the press communities in urban
America it means that we have to have a
great educational system and people say
oh that's great Bernie that's utopian it
is not utopian this is something that in
the wealthiest country in the history of
the world we can afford and we should be
doing rather than giving creating a
situation where Amazon pays zero in
federal income taxes so to answer your
question there's a deep questioning and
again I'm not here to tell you I have
all the answers but there are a lot of
people out there who are basically
giving up hope and for those people I
guess drugs is is the alternative so
what you're saying essentially is that
if we can do something to mitigate
despair then we'll do something to at
least stop some of the demand for these
easily I believe that is the case look
if I am optimistic if I'm excited about
going to work tomorrow and I'm seeing my
kid doing great in school and you know
when I get sick I can go to the doctor's
office that have a sense of community my
downtown is not all boarded up because
businesses have left but we have we have
a community yeah the like the strong
likelihood is there will be less
diseases of despair and drugs than we
currently sing now when we're talking
about impoverished communities and
chronically when you're talking about
cities like Baltimore or parts of
Chicago and Detroit that have just been
in a terrible state of despair for long
periods of time and it doesn't seem like
there's a way out the people that are
born there the people that live there
they live in this state of of despair
what what can be done to resolve all
these terribly impoverished communities
and bring them up to a standard where
these kids that grow up there they feel
like there is an out that they do have
an opportunity and why is this not
addressed when we
talk about making America great wouldn't
like fixing the worst parts of the
country be the primary concern the the
less people that grow up in a terribly
disadvantageous position from birth
wouldn't that be an important thing and
what can you do to resolve that well Joe
I think you you know you said it better
than I can
I think you're right you know when we
talk about what it means to live in a
great society and a great nation a
nation that we're proud of I'm afraid
there are some people who have
incredible wealth and power so you know
what's great is that we're seeing a
growth in the number of billionaires in
America isn't that terrific we got one
guy who's worth a hundred and fifty five
billion dollars how great oh by the way
we're building more nuclear weapons and
we're spending seven hundred and fifty
billion dollars a year on the military
isn't that extraordinary
and by the way JCB yacht that that
billionaire has you know it's three
miles long isn't that great your point
is that we have to I think as I
understand what you're saying we have to
redefine what being a great nation is
about we are not a great nation when we
have 40 million people living in poverty
and in despair we're not a great nation
when we have massive levels of income
and wealth inequality when 87 million
people can afford to go to a doctor
today
so they answer your question I think
that as a nation we have got to focus a
great deal of attention on those
distressed communities often they're
african-american often they're Latino
often they are rural white communities
and that means making sure that the kids
they get the quality education that they
deserve making sure that we're creating
good-paying jobs in those communities I
voted against NAFTA permanent normal
trade relations with China and other
trade agreements because I knew that
those agreements were written by
corporate America with the goal of
shutting down plants in this country and
moving abroad and the result of that has
been the loss of millions of good-paying
jobs and the the complete destruction of
communities all across this country in
the south and all across this country so
we have got to rebuild those communities
we have got to bring high-tech jobs
NACHA
to Silicon Valley but to rural America
again I don't have magical answers but
the goal is we will not understand this
administration turn our backs on
distressed communities we will reveal
those communities we will build the
millions of units of affordable housing
that we need now think about what it
means to a community now where people
are living in terrible housing or
housing they cannot afford when we put
young people to work rebuilding their
own communities will that become a
indication of hope and optimism I think
it will we're talking about so many
deeply important issues and all of them
that will be under the control or at
least the direction of the one person
who winds up becoming the president
United States is it a impossible job I
mean it seems like being the president
you are managing so many different
aspects of our economy our culture our
safety our environment international
communication and it's so it's so
in-depth how does one person do a job
like that but one person doesn't do it
and you certainly don't do it by
tweeting every other day major policy
issues I think he tweets a lot more than
every other you know what you do and
this is the way any sane president
operates is you need to be working with
the smartest men and women from all
walks of life who understand these
issues every issue we have touched on
Joe is enormously complicated and I can
send out a you know twenty word tweet on
it but that doesn't solve it so unlike
Trump you know we will bring together
the best and most knowledgeable people
in this country to address the housing
crisis to address the issue of these
diseases of despair we didn't even touch
on climate change you know and then the
future of the planet how do we lead the
world in transforming our energy system
and creating the kind of jobs that we
need how do we revitalize American
democracy so that instead of suppressing
the vote we're getting more young people
involved in the political process so the
answer question it is not a one-person
job and anyone who thinks that is is
dead wrong
you need the help of a very strong
administration
that knows the issues that comes from
the ranks of the working class and this
is the promise I will make are at my
administration unlike Trump's it's not
going to be filled with billionaires
who's you know basically a very often
greedy type people who it is going to be
filled with the best people often from
the working class itself from the trade
union movement people who are going to
help us create policies that work for
workers and not just the billionaire
class now we're getting to the end of
your hour here so climate change is
obviously an enormous issue for our
country and for the world what what
could be done and what do you think you
can do as president that can somehow
another slow down this this process well
first of all we have to have a president
who unlike Trump beliefs and science
that I do and what the scientists are
telling us as I mentioned earlier is
that we have fewer than 12 years to
transform our energy system or else
there will be irreparable damage done
not only to our country but to the world
now climate change is not just an
American issue so we could do tomorrow
do all the right things but of China and
Russia and India and the rest of the
Brazil and Africa does not do the right
thing you know we're not going to make
the progress we need so here is what we
have to do in my view number one we have
to tell the fossil fuel industry that
their short-term profits and they make a
whole lot of money their short-term
profits are not more important than the
future of this planet I don't think
that's a hard sell to make you cannot
keep producing a product which is
destroying the planet in the United
States and around the world so by saying
that you're saying you would have to
move we would have to move consciously
away Absalon fossil fuels no if so but
soon maybe if we do that how do you tell
the fossil fuel companies do you tell
them you can't sell fossil fuels anymore
there are a variety of ways to do that
but that is the bottom line and and by
the way in the midst of that we do what
we call is a a just transition the guy
out on the oil rig today simply wants to
feed his family and the coal miners
today want to feed their families and
we're not going to leave them I'm a pro
worker
the probably the strongest pro-worker
record of any member of the Congress so
it is not my intention to throw these
guys out on the and women out on the
street and ignore the pain that they
will go through we are proposing
billions of dollars to rebuild those
communities and make sure that those
guys and women get new jobs so we're not
just discarding people in the fossil
fuel industry but ultimately the product
that they are producing which is now
carbon emissions is destroying the
planet so we have to move away from
fossil fuel in a very bold way into
energy efficiency right now in my own
state of Vermont and all over this
country there are buildings which are
incredibly wasteful we don't have the
windows we don't know the insulation we
don't have the roofing the doors that we
need to keep the buildings warm in the
winter and cool in the summer and we can
create just an incredible number of jobs
just retrofitting our buildings second
of all we need to move very aggressively
to sustainable energies like wind and
solar in California you're doing a good
job with wind
Iowa's doing good job Texas doing a good
job we got to do much more solar there
is incredible potential out there price
of solar has dropped in recent years and
we have got to not only transform the
energy system in our own country we got
to lead the world in working with Russia
and China because in this issue we are
in it together
and here's my dream and maybe this may
be a utopian dream the world right now
is spending a trillion and a half
dollars on weapons of destruction
designed to kill each other and maybe
just maybe if we had a kind of leader
and I hope to be that leader who says to
the world instead of spending a trillion
and a half dollars killing each other
maybe we use those resources to
transform the global energy system and
save the planet for our kids and our
grandchildren that's the goal that I
have well these these ideas sound great
but in the competitive environment of
global politics how would you convince
Russia or China or any of these
countries to do something that would put
them in some sort of a competitive
disadvantage well and the answer is Joe
if we do not do that in 50 100 years
everybody's going to be terrible
disarray and look I'm not you know I'm
saying you know I'm not telling you
tomorrow it's gonna happen but you got
to make the case these people you know
Putin is a dictator I dislike them
intensely you know Qi and China very
authoritarian self on top but they're
not crazy people and presumably they
have concerned about their kids and
their grandchildren this is a planet
under siege you know I don't want to
become a science-fiction you've all seen
the movies of the media racing toward
Earth we got blow up the earth what do
we do well we got to get together this
is in a sense what that is about you
know when I think about in 1941 after
Pearl Harbor all right we were faced
with a war in the east with China a war
in the West in Europe with Hitler within
two years the United States had
transformed its economy to address and
win the war basically in two or three
years by reindustrialize qamar we can do
it we can lead the world that's what we
have to do so in your eyes we have to
look at the economy almost as if the
same kind of threat or excuse me the
environment as if it's the same kind of
threat as a Nazi Germany back together
look if you asked the defense the pomp
you asked the CIA you ask the defense
people all over the world tell us what
the great national security threat is
you know what it is it is climate change
there's a lot of people though that are
skeptical this how would you convinced I
mean this is a big part of the problem
right there's a narrative that you hear
from a lot of people that oh you know
climate change is not a proven science
and climate change is a hoax and I mean
this is something that's repeated over
and over again and I'm sure some of it
has to do with lobbyists and some of it
has to do with merchants of doubt' that
go out there and see the world with
disinformation to try to increase their
profits and continue the practices that
they're currently enjoying you know Joe
what I'm thinking back I don't know if
all you listeners can't remember this
cuz mold of the most but I can remember
tobacco ads cigarette ads on television
yes talk the guy dressed in a white
truck smoking away this is a great
cigarette will improve your health
they lied the tobacco industry knew
exactly what was going on and the fossil
fuel industry is lying right now and the
President of the United States is either
too stupid to understand what the
scientists are telling us or he is lying
as well climate should look I am NOT the
scientist there's not my idea I listened
to the
scientists the debate is long over
climate change is real my god look at
what's happening around the world hey
the worst you know July was I think the
warmest July or warmest month in in the
modern history of the world the Arctic
ice is is melting
heat waves in Europe all right just look
out the window at what's going on so
this is not Bernie Sanders talking this
is the scientific community climate
change is real it will only get worse if
we do not act boldly to cut carbon
emissions well we just did an hour sir
so I'm gonna let you go because I know
you got very important things to do one
last question if you got into the office
and you found out something about aliens
if you found out something about UFOs
would you let us know I'll tell you my
wife would demand that I let you know is
your wife a UFO not now she's not a UFO
no it's just birdy what is going on do
you already access the records you don't
have any access I don't know okay you
let us know though all right I'll be on
the show well doubts about the show
please all right thank you sir I
appreciate your time oh thank you very
very much
[Music]